---
title: Machine ID Manifesto
description: A manifesto for Trusted Machine Computing
---

Increasingly, machines and services are doing more and more impactful and
privileged work, escaping the perimeter of a SaaS. Services are increasingly
communicating with each other across network and company boundaries. AI agents
are getting increasingly common and are becoming more autonomous and powerful at
an accelerating pace.

On the other side, services and machines are increasingly a target of attacks,
with hackers trying to get access to critical systems, stealing API keys and
exploiting compromises to get access to critical data and control over
mission-critical systems.

These challenges create an urgent need for trusted computing that rests on three
pillars.

### Strong Cryptographic Identity

Each service and machine should have a strong, cryptographic identity, that is
verifiable by other services and organizations, resistant to hacks and
exfiltration of secrets.

### Trusted execution

Systems should verify the chain of trust of the code starting from the origin,
making sure it has not been tampered with at the startup or during execution in
a tamper-proof execution environment.

### Complete visibility and unified access control

We need a unified way to reason and express the properties of the entire
ecosystem of services: what data they have access to and why, what permissions
they have, and what data have they accessed and modified with tamper-proof
evidence and trial of their execution.

Combined, we will get a strong ecosystem of AI, automation and other workloads
running together in a predictable way that is secure and possible to reason
about and maintain.

Teleport Workload & Machine Identity is on a mission to make this vision a
reality.
